Business case (#81)
UCL/OSPO: ospo/business-case.md

# UCL's Open Source Programme Office

*Executive Summary*
<!--
> help them understand the project’s purpose, benefits and implications. Some components of an executive summary include the project overview, business need, proposed solution to the need, cost estimate, return on investment, risks, timeline and a call to action.
-->

> Our university as many institutions and organisations around the globe depends on Open Source,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our university as many institutions and organisations around the globe depends on open source,
```

whether it's software, hardware, data or other resources as research and educational outputs.
Open source software is everywhere and it has a huge economic impact.
The [State of Open Source paper][sospaper], shows that 96% of all software included open source software.

> Moreover, a [study from the Harvard Business School][harvard-oss] has shown recently that open source software generated $8.8 trillion of value and production costs are reduced a factor of 3.5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, a [study from the Harvard Business School][harvard-oss] has shown recently that open source software generated $8.8 trillion of value and production costs are reduced by a factor of 3.5.
```

Other open source "products" haven't been under such a detailed analysis yet, however, from the point of view of an university,
they are still very important, for example for the Open Science reproducibility mission as well as for the creation of Open Educational resources.

> The creation of an Open Source Programme Office (OSPO) helps to coordinate its usage and development as well as to nurture its adoption across the university.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An Open Source Programme Office (OSPO) will coordinate the usage and development of open source, as well as nurturing its adoption across the university.
```

We propose three main pillars that an OSPO in UCL should cover: Research, Education and Infrastructure,
supported by three main foundations: Training, Community and Policy.
With those six aspects we are increasing collaboration and visibility (within and outside UCL) as well as providing an overview about the stronger and weakest points of our ecosystem and dependencies.

> This office will provide a service to obtain metrics, deliver training and provide mentorship and guidance on running open source projects;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This office will provide: a service to obtain metrics, deliver training, and provide mentorship and guidance on running open source projects;
```

a medium to support grant applications and compliance with respect to open source requirements;
a hub of communication between the UCL community, innovation and enterprise team and external partners;

> and an advocacy platform for promoting open source culture practices and provide policy recommendations across the university.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and an advocacy platform for promoting open source culture and practices, producing policy recommendations for the university.
```

and add components through out the next five years,
with costs shared across different departments across UCL,
starting with the current 0.25 FTE provided by ARC and increase it to a shared 3 FTE across the university at the end of this period.

Being the first UK university to have an OSPO provides a service no available in the country to our researchers, staff and students,
as well as brings visibility in open source communities, attracting workforce and students, as well as investment from external bodies.

[sospaper]: https://www.synopsys.com/software-integrity/resources/analyst-reports/open-source-security-risk-analysis.html#introMenu
[harvard-oss]: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4693148
[arc]: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/arc
[OOSS]: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/open-science-research-support/ucl-office-open-science-and-scholarship

## Context
<!--
> context for your project, explaining the problem that it's meant to solve and how it aligns with the organisation's vision and strategic plan
-->

UCL has a long history of open-source software development for research and open-source educational resources.

> In a recent study, we identified more than a thousand open-source software projects owned[^owned] by the UCL community that are directly related to UCL research, publications, or teaching on the GitHub platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a recent study, we identified more than a thousand open-source software projects owned[^owned] by the UCL community on the GitHub platform that are directly related to UCL research, publications, or teaching.
```

A more recent example is the [BrainGlobe Initiative][bgi] that was established between researches at the Sainsbury Wellcome Centre and the Technical University of Munich since 2XXX(FIXME). They have developed a whole ecosystem of research software tools and nurture a community of researcher over the years, that was, last year, recognised by receiving an international award for its contribution to open, accessible and collaborative neuroscience[^bgi-award]. 

Those are only three examples, but we are sure that there are many others that we don't know within UCL. As researchers have become more familiar with the benefits of open source development, as well as, funding bodies around the world, have started to request to open source what is created with public money, at ARC we've seen an increase of researchers being interested to follow those practice.

> Open source projects enables collaboration and discoverability, however, open source projects also suffer from support and most of the times it relies on volunteering efforts. As a organisation that uses and produces open source, we should be more aware of our production and dependencies and how to support them better.

Reviewer: >dependencies

Would it be obvious what we mean here to someone outside of software dev?

> This is the main objective of the Open Source Programme Office we propose. Mapping and cataloguing all the open source we generate helps us to have an overview of where are the needs for our community, and therefore act on it. <!-- Through training, guidance, collaborating, lobbing,  -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open source projects enable collaboration and discoverability.
However, open source projects often also suffer from a lack of support and rely heavily on volunteer effort.
As a organisation that uses and produces open source, we should be more aware of our production and dependencies, and how to support them better.
This is the main objective of the Open Source Programme Office we propose.
Mapping and cataloguing all the open source we use and generate helps us to have an overview of where the needs are within our community, and therefore act on them. <!-- Through training, guidance, collaborating, lobbing,  -->
```

> This problem is commonly represented by this xkcd.com webcomic by Randall Munroe, where it represents the fragility of the digital infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This problem is commonly represented by this xkcd.com webcomic by Randall Munroe, which represents the fragility of modern digital infrastructure.
```

<!-- End Footnotes -->

Though the goals of organisations across these domains differ when establishing an OSPO, they create a fabric that helps those organisations to collaborate and combine efforts to maximise the impact (and support) of open source software. Some activities that an OSPO may do are:

- To advocate for Open Source practises within an organisation through community engagement;
- To measure usage of and dependency on open (and closed!) source projects;
- To measure UCL's impact on open source;
- To mitigate associate risks (unlicensed code, vendor lock-in, licensing misuse, etc);
- To promote, guide and educate internal and external community members on open source culture from technical, social, political and economic perspectives;

> - To push policy forward that safeguards open source and protects technological sovereignty of the institution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To push policy forward that safeguards open source and protects the technological sovereignty of the institution.
```

[ospo-cern]: https://opensource.web.cern.ch/
[ospo-cms]: https://cms.gov/digital-service/open-source-program-office
[ospo-cmu]: https://www.library.cmu.edu/services/ospo
[ospo-ec]: https://interoperable-europe.ec.europa.eu/collection/ec-ospo
[ospo-eth]: https://transfer.ethz.ch/researchers/oss.html
[ospo-eu]: https://static-page-bdf202.usercontent.opencode.de/
[ospo-fr]: https://code.gouv.fr/
[ospo-jhu]: https://ospo.library.jhu.edu/
[ospo-munich]: https://opensource.muenchen.de/ospo.html
[ospo-paris]: https://opensource.paris.fr/
[ospo-public]: https://floss-pso.network/
[ospo-snt]: https://www.uni.lu/snt-en/
<!-- FIXME: STSci appears on archived OSPO++ page, but no link -->
[ospo-stsci]: http://www.stsci.edu/
[ospo-tcd]: https://www.tcd.ie/innovation/for-trinity-innovators/open-source-programme-office/
[ospo-todogrp]: https://todogroup.org/
[ospo-uc]: https://ucospo.net/
[ospo-un]: https://undp.org/digital
[oss-watch]: http://oss-watch.ac.uk/
[ssi]: https://www.software.ac.uk/
[state-of-ospo-2024]: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/ospo-2024
[young-2024]: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13910682

## Why does UCL need an OSPO? What benefits does it give?

> Open Source is a fundamental component of our research and university infrastructure. However, this is usually forgotten and considered as a given. We do not know how much we depend on it. Equally, we know very little about the social, research, and economic impact that the open source code generated by UCL has. Contributing to Open Source projects requires more than technical knowledge, it is tied to social and economic aspects, and an OSPO helps to make it more accessible. An OSPO in UCL will benefit the following areas:

Reviewer: Is it worth really spelling this out? At least at SWC, without OSS, there isn't a single bit of research we could do.

- research

>   - Provide guidance on sustainability, community engagement and licensing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Provide guidance on sustainability, community engagement and licensing to increase reuse and impact of UCL's software.
```

- education
  - Train students and staff on the use of and contribution to Open Source projects.

>   - Promote open source alternatives to tools used on modules allowing students to continue practising the learnt skills once left UCL and therefore losing access to licensed tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Promote open source alternatives to tools used in modules, allowing students to continue practising the learnt skills once they have left UCL and therefore lose access to licensed tools.
```

- infrastructure (HPC, Moodle, Portico, HR & Finances, Department administration)
  - Provide support to open source tooling
  - Enable cross-department collaboration
- community

>   - Ease collaboration with different institutions for similar tasks (from research software to infrastructure)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Community
  - Facilitate collaboration with other institutions for similar tasks.
```

  - metrics - what's created within/with help from UCL, what are we depending on. Attract funding and collaborations,
  - skills promoted will help students employment while also attract talent from open source communities,
  - gain on digital sovereignty,
  - leadership experience - mentorship, coaching and collaborations are skills that will be gained as part of successful open-source projects.

[^sovereignty]: Ther term digital soverignty refers to an instution being able to exercise control over their technology infrastructure. This becoming more common now a days with the growth of Artificial Intelligence solutions and where the data used to generate the models as the models produced are kept (data residency) as well as who operates and controls the technology and how the data is accessed. 

**mission statement** <!-- What and How; Doing now towards goals -->
<!--
> You’ll need to define your project vision, goals and objectives.
-->

To support and train UCL community to reinforcing involvement and collaboration with open source communities, increasing students employability and strengthen industry links.

**vision** <!-- Why | meaning; Building towards the future -->

> To establish UCL as a university that nurtures open source development supporting students and staff in their open source needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To establish UCL as a university that nurtures open source development, supporting students and staff in their open source needs.
```

**goals**

- Identify projects that need support (internal and external);
- Train UCL members on open source technically and culturally;
- Promote open source infrastructure;
- Study impact of open source within the university;
- Collaborate with external communities and industry;
- Provide legal guidance on licensing and open source contributions.

**objectives**

<!-- what would be the difference between objectvies here and the one set under § Plan? -->

<!--
> *explain how it fits a niche or serves a need*
-->

**Risks of not having an OSPO**

> One of the biggest difficulties on large institutions is communication. And this is more aggravated when there's not a central hub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the biggest difficulties on large institutions is communication. And this is exacerbated when there's not a central hub.
```

> In the case of open source, members of our community are mostly self-guided, having to rediscover all from scratch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of open source, members of our community are mostly self-guided, having to rediscover everything from scratch.
```

can fall into vendor lock-in leading to inability to pivot away from expensive contracts (at least without significant costs);
be locked-out in case of geopolitical circumstances[^icc-case];
take poor choices of open source solutions that lead to expensive failures or support costs.
Whereas if included open source metrics within the procurement process and help to support teams to develop the skills to maintain that software not just puts UCL in a better position, but it also contributes to improvements for users around the world and to the growth of the internal team.

<!-- footnotes -->
[^icc-case]: [Microsoft suspend access to email account to an International Criminal Court prosecutor][ms-icc] is a very recent case of situations that could arise when running most of our infrastructures on foreign companies.
<!-- end footnotes -->

<!-- links -->
[ms-icc]: https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/20/technology/us-tech-europe-microsoft-trump-icc.html
<!-- endlinks -->

## How would it work at UCL?

An OSPO in UCL will become a team providing a central hub of communication, research, training and support, with different scopes. 

> The team will be composed by a pool of staff and students from across the university and managed by a committee formed by delegates representing different aspect of the university (namely research, education, infrastructure, community, policy,services).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The team will be composed by a pool of staff and students from across the university, and managed by a committee formed by delegates representing different aspects of the university (research, education, infrastructure, community, policy, and professional services).
```

The OSPO committee will be formed with the UCL staff who has already reached us, and as part of their commitment will be to define the membership terms and structure of this committee.

In collaboration with ARC education team, OSPO team will map and advertise on the web which programs, training and resources exists on the university that are providing training related with open source. 
For example, ARC's led [Centre for Doctoral Training in Collaborative Computational Modelling at the Interface][ccmi] has a strong emphasis on learning to contribute to open source communities.

Design, distribute and analyse a survey to understand the open source needs across the UCL community. 
The design will be based on surveys run by other universities, focusing on users ([University of Wisconsin Madison results][uw-survey]), and contributors ([University of California results][uc-survey]).
This may require applying for a small grant to pay students to carry out the analysis.

> Collaborate with the Library for the [Open Science awards][osci-award] open-source component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OSPO will collaborate with the UCL Libraries for the [Open Science awards][osci-award] open-source component.
```

> Open a digital forum for the UCL community ask questions and provide answers about open source topics. This will first start as an email forum, but it may develop into something else as the community grows.

Reviewer 2: Most UCL communities these days seem to be on Teams rather than email?

#### Year 2-3

> Data scrapping and metrics analysis will be improved to measure citations on publications, risk of software dependencies and licensing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Data scraping and metrics analysis will be improved to measure citations on publications, risk of software dependencies and licensing.
```

[osci-award]: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/open-science-research-support/open-science/about-office-open-science-scholarship/ucl-open-science
<!-- end links -->

<!--
*project scope*
> all the tasks and deliverables that will be executed in your project to reach your business objectives

*project schedule*
> a timeline for the project by estimating how long it will take to get each task completed. Gantt chart

*Marketing Strategy*
> distribution channels, pricing, target customers, among other aspects of your marketing plan or strategy.
-->

#### Resources
*project budget*
<!--
> Your budget is an estimate of everything in your project plan and what it will cost to complete the project over the scheduled time allotted. Personnel costs, software or hardware costs, consulting fees, training costs and contingency funds
-->

At the moment we have been developing the office with a 0.3 FTE provided by ARC.
We estimate that for year 1 we will required a combined effort of 1 FTE,
and increase that through out the years to reach 3 FTE.

We believe this could be done by contributions from other departments with a maximum of 1 FTE from ARC.

> Additionally, there will be costs required to participation on conferences. Those costs could be covered by the department of the delegate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, there will be costs required to participation at conferences. Those costs could be covered by the department of the delegate.
```

- through providing open source training, our students will gain employability opportunities and our staff will grow their skills,
- to save licensing costs by using open source alternatives rather than closed source software,
- to avoid time spent reinventing software or falling into licensing incompatibilities,
- to recommend where the university should invest efforts to support sustainability of projects,

<!-- NOTE: Is this sufficient to make it financially sustainable for UCL? -->

### Organisation

*Project Governance*
<!--
> ll the project management rules and procedures that apply to your project. For example, it defines the roles and responsibilities of the project team members and the framework for decision-making.
-->

The UCL OSPO will comprise a core team from ARC and _at least one_ delegated representative from each team or department in the university that has a stake in open source.

These teams are:
- The Department of Computer Science;
- The Sainsbury Wellcome Centre's Neuroinformatics Unit;
- The Office of Open Science and Scholarship;
- ISD;
- Digital education;
- The Bartlett Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis;
- and Mechanical Engineering.

> 

Reviewer 3: UCLB? See my earlier comment.

-->

The OSPO will follow what's known as Open Development practices, publishing everything in the website with all the decisions and minutes publicly available.
At the moment this is available on the [wiki of this repository][wiki].

*Progress Reports*

Yearly reports on activities and outcomes are and will be published on the website.
Metrics results will be published every six months on the website.

<!-- links -->
[wiki]: https://github.com/UCL/open-source/wiki
<!-- end links -->
### Supporters

ARC supports this initiative, providing at the moment 0.2 FTE and funding the 4-week deployment of the open source metrics tool last year.

<!-- Can any provide FTEs or financial support? -->
The Neuroinformatics Unit at the Sainsbury Welcome Centre supports the OSPO and has developed an Open Source week workshop aligned with the OSPO objectives.

ISD ...

CASA ...

## How will we know if this worked out?
*Success Criteria*

If the community feels that the OSPO has supported them. For this we will keep some metrics on our efforts, like people helped and projects supported.

> Community activities and participation will provide insights of whether we are doing a good work reaching all the departments and their interests.

Reviewer 2: This will need improving, similarly to the financial analysis above.

```suggestion
- Whether the UCL community feels that the OSPO has supported them.
  We will record engagement with and feedback on our efforts, such as people trained, advice given and projects supported.
- Whether the OSPO's activities have engaged every part of UCL, supporting all faculties, departments and centres.
- Longer term, quantifiable financial impacts will be tracked, such as the replacement of closed-source products with open alternatives leading to lower procurement and licensing costs.
- Better tracking of UCL-produced open source software will allow us to assess whether its use externally and impact have increased.
```

*Executive Summary*
> help them understand the project’s purpose, benefits and implications. Some components of an executive summary include the project overview, business need, proposed solution to the need, cost estimate, return on investment, risks, timeline and a call to action.

## Context

> context for your project, explaining the problem that it's meant to solve and how it aligns with the organisation's vision and strategic plan

UCL has a long history of open-source software development for research and open-source educational materials.

In a recent study, we identified more than a thousand open-source projects owned[^1] by the UCL community that are directly related to UCL research, publications, or teaching on the GitHub platform.

> The oldest of these projects dates back to 1997, notably before the invention of git itself, and is still one of our most active projects today.

Reviewer 4: Is this refering to the first open-source software project in UCL "is still one of our most active projects today."? I think it would be beneficial for readers to know which project and if there are any associated references.

You might like to add some additional references for git and Github to make the historical context stronger: 
Initial release of git was 7 April 2005 20 years ago (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git) and github was founded on 2008 ([Gousios et al. 2014](https://github.com/mxochicale/tools/blob/main/github/references/lean-ghtorrent.pdf))

- To advocate for Open Source practises between an organisation through community engagement;
- To measure usage and dependency on open (and closed!) source software/hardware to increase impact and reduce risks;
- To promote, guide and educate internal and external community members on open source culture from technical, social, political and economical perspectives;
- To push policy forward that safeguards open source and protects technological sovereignty of the institution.

![](./Activities-of-academic-OSPO.png)
*Figure 1: Activities of an Academic OSPO - From [Young, et al. (2024)][young-2024] - Licensed under CC-BY*

Those activities, however, are not new to OSPOs. Over the years, different groups within organisations or wider institutions have been engaging on some of those activities. For example, Oxford University had a group named [OSS Watch][oss-watch] between 2003-2014 that provided unbiased advice and guidance on the use, development, and licensing of free software, open source software, and open source hardware. Similarly, the [Software Sustainability Institute][ssi] has been advocating for better software practices in research across the UK since 2010.

> A more detailed definition of ana academic OSPO can be found in [Young, et al. (2024)][young-2024]

Reviewer 4: typo `ana`

[^2]: [STIR](https://github.com/UCL/STIR) - The Software for Tomographic Image Reconstruction.

[^1]: Where "owned" simply denotes project ownership: open source development work done by UCL staff in aid of UCL research or education.

## What is an OSPO?

An Open Source Programme Office (OSPO) is a body within an organisation to look after their open source strategy and operations. OSPOs has been widely adopted in the commercial world[^OSPO-commerce], governmental institutions and world organisations[^OSPO-public]. More recently, various academic and research institutions have also found the value of having OSPOs. Focusing on the latest, we can find research centres such as [CERN][ospo-cern] or [Space Telescope Science Institute][ospo-stsci] and universities like [Johns Hopkins][ospo-jhu] (first one, since 2019), [University of California][ospo-uc] and [Carnegie Mellon University][ospo-cmu] to name a few from US, whereas in Europe we've got universities like [Trinity College Dublin][ospo-tcd] in Ireland, [University of Luxembourg][ospo-snt] and [ETH Zurich][ospo-eth] in Switzerland.

<!-- Footnotes -->

> [^OSPO-commerce]: The two biggest OSPO networks in industry are: [OSPO Alliance][ospo-allience] supported by the [Eclipse Foundation][eclipse] and [TODO Group][ospo-todogrp] supported by the [Linux Foundation][LF]. In a [report published in 2024 by the TODO Group][state-of-ospo-2024], it's found that 77% of large organizations have an OSPO (DOI: 10.70828/FXMR3018). <!-- typos: ignore -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^OSPO-commerce]: The two biggest OSPO networks in industry are: [OSPO Alliance][ospo-alliance] supported by the [Eclipse Foundation][eclipse] and [TODO Group][ospo-todogrp] supported by the [Linux Foundation][LF]. A [report published in 2024 by the TODO Group][state-of-ospo-2024] found that 77% of large organisations have an OSPO (DOI: 10.70828/FXMR3018). <!-- typos: ignore -->
```

> [^OSPO-public]: Covering this space there is the [EU OSPO Network][ospo-eu] lead by the [EC OSPO][ospo-ec] and the [Public Sector OSPOs Network][ospo-public]. They include OSPOs from [United Nations][ospo-un]; from country wide like [France government][ospo-fr] or the [Netherlands](https://opensourcewerken.nl/); cities such as [City of Paris][ospo-paris] or [Munich][ospo-munich]; and specialised public organisations like [Digital Service at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in US][ospo-cms].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^OSPO-public]: Covering this space there is the [EU OSPO Network][ospo-eu] led by the [EC OSPO][ospo-ec], and the [Public Sector OSPOs Network][ospo-public]. They include OSPOs from the [United Nations][ospo-un]; country-wide examples like the [French government][ospo-fr] or the [Netherlands](https://opensourcewerken.nl/); cities such as [City of Paris][ospo-paris] or [Munich][ospo-munich]; and specialised public organisations like [Digital Service at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in US][ospo-cms].
```

<!-- End Footnotes -->

Though the goals of organisations across these domains differ when establishing an OSPO, they create a fabric that helps those organisations to collaborate and combine efforts to maximise the impact (and support) of open source software. Some activities that an OSPO may do are:

> - To advocate for Open Source practises between an organisation through community engagement;

Reviewer 2: You can't be between one organisation! What is meant here?

Author: meant "within"

> - To measure usage and dependency on open (and closed!) source projects;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To measure usage of and dependency on open (and closed!) source projects;
```

- To measure UCL's impact on open source;

> - To mitigate associate risks (unlicensed code, closed source, etc);

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't call 'closed source' a blanket risk - likely to put readers off. Rather only mention it when we talk about specific types of risk that it gives rise to.

- To promote, guide and educate internal and external community members on open source culture from technical, social, political and economical perspectives;
- To push policy forward that safeguards open source and protects technological sovereignty of the institution.

![](./Activities-of-academic-OSPO.png)
*Figure 1: Activities of an Academic OSPO - From [Young, et al. (2024)][young-2024] - Licensed under CC-BY*

> Those activities, however, are not new to OSPOs. Over the years, different groups within organisations or wider institutions have been engaging on some of those activities. For example, Oxford University had a group named [OSS Watch][oss-watch] between 2003-2014 that provided unbiased advice and guidance on the use, development, and licensing of free software, open source software, and open source hardware. Similarly, the [Software Sustainability Institute][ssi] has been advocating for better software practices in research across the UK since 2010.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those activities, however, are not new to OSPOs. Over the years, different groups within organisations have been engaging in some of those activities. For example, Oxford University had a group named [OSS Watch][oss-watch] between 2003-2014 that provided unbiased advice and guidance on the use, development, and licensing of free software, open source software, and open source hardware. Similarly, the [Software Sustainability Institute][ssi] has been advocating for better software practices in research across the UK since 2010.
```

[LF]: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/
[eclipse]: https://www.eclipse.org/
[ospo-allience]: https://ospo-alliance.org/
[ospo-cern]: https://opensource.web.cern.ch/
[ospo-cms]: https://cms.gov/digital-service/open-source-program-office
[ospo-cmu]: https://www.library.cmu.edu/services/ospo
[ospo-ec]: https://interoperable-europe.ec.europa.eu/collection/ec-ospo
[ospo-eth]: https://transfer.ethz.ch/researchers/oss.html
[ospo-eu]: https://static-page-bdf202.usercontent.opencode.de/
[ospo-fr]: https://code.gouv.fr/
[ospo-jhu]: https://ospo.library.jhu.edu/
[ospo-munich]: https://opensource.muenchen.de/ospo.html
[ospo-paris]: https://opensource.paris.fr/
[ospo-public]: https://floss-pso.network/
[ospo-snt]: https://www.uni.lu/snt-en/
<!-- FIXME: STSci appears on archived OSPO++ page, but no link -->
[ospo-stsci]: http://www.stsci.edu/
[ospo-tcd]: https://www.tcd.ie/innovation/for-trinity-innovators/open-source-programme-office/
[ospo-todogrp]: https://todogroup.org/
[ospo-uc]: https://ucospo.net/
[ospo-un]: https://undp.org/digital
[oss-watch]: http://oss-watch.ac.uk/
[ssi]: https://www.software.ac.uk/
[state-of-ospo-2024]: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/ospo-2024

> [young-2024]: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13910682

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[young-2024]: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13910682

```

> ## Why does UCL need an OSPO? / What benefits does it give?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why does UCL need an OSPO? What benefits does it give?
```

Open Source is a fundamental component of our research and university infrastructure. However, this is usually forgotten and considered as a given. We do not know how much we depend on it. Equally, we know very little about the social, research, and economic impact that the open source code generated by the UCL has. Contributing to Open Source projects requires more than technical knowledge, it is tied to social and economic aspects, and an OSPO helps to make it more accessible. An OSPO in UCL will benefit the following areas:

- research

>   - Provide guidance with sustainability, community engagement and licensing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Provide guidance on sustainability, community engagement and licensing.
```

- education
  - Train students and staff on the use and contribution of Open Source projects.
  - Promote Open source alternatives to tools taught on courses to allow learners improve skills when losing access to closed source tools
- infrastructure (HPC, Moodle, Portico, HR & Finances, Department administration)
  - Provide support to open source tooling
  - Enable cross-department collaboration
- community
  - Ease collaboration with different institutions for similar tasks (from research software to infrastructure)
- policy

>   - Include Open Source solutions and technical sovereignty into UCL procurement,

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about the 'sovereignty' term when applied to an institution rather than a country. We don't have a king of UCL ;)

Is this commonly used in non-OSPO contexts too?

- impact
  - metrics - what's created within/with help from UCL, what are we depending on. Attract funding and collaborations
  - skills promoted will help students employment while also attract talent from open source communities
  - gain technical sovereignty

*mission statement*

> > You’ll need to define your project vision, goals and objectives.

Reviewer 2: We also need to reflect the viewpoint of people like Will Greenly here, not just the research perspective.

[LF]: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/
[eclipse]: https://www.eclipse.org/
[ospo-allience]: https://ospo-alliance.org/
[ospo-cern]: https://opensource.web.cern.ch/
[ospo-cms]: https://cms.gov/digital-service/open-source-program-office
[ospo-ec]: https://interoperable-europe.ec.europa.eu/collection/ec-ospo
[ospo-eth]: https://transfer.ethz.ch/researchers/oss.html
[ospo-eu]: https://static-page-bdf202.usercontent.opencode.de/
[ospo-fr]: https://code.gouv.fr/
[ospo-jhu]: https://ospo.library.jhu.edu/
[ospo-munich]: https://opensource.muenchen.de/ospo.html
[ospo-paris]: https://opensource.paris.fr/
[ospo-public]: https://floss-pso.network/
[ospo-snt]: https://ucospo.net/
[ospo-stsci]: http://www.stsci.edu/ <!-- FIXME: It appears on archived OSPO++ page, but no link -->
[ospo-tcd]: https://www.tcd.ie/innovation/for-trinity-innovators/open-source-programme-office/
[ospo-todogr]: https://todogroup.org/
[ospo-uc]: https://www.uni.lu/snt-en/
[ospo-un]: https://undp.org/digital
[oss-watch]: http://oss-watch.ac.uk/
[ssi]: https://www.software.ac.uk/

## Why does UCL need an OSPO? / What benefits does it give?

> Open Source is a fundamental component of our research and university infrastructure. However, this is usually forgotten and considered as a given. We do not know how much we depend on it. Equally, we know very little about the social, research, and economic impact that the open source code generated by the UCL has. Contributing to Open Source projects requires more than technical knowledge, it is tied to social and economic aspects, and an OSPO helps to make it more accessible. An OSPO in UCL will benefit the following areas:

Reviewer 5: (I think "we know very little about the ... impact" is what we want to say here)

> Figure out the tasks you’ll have to take to get the project done. Estimate how long it will take to complete each one.

*risk assessment*
> identify and analyse the risks associated with your project activities. From there, you can assess the likelihood and impact of each and rank them based on this information. The risk assessment makes it easier to focus on the most pressing risks and includes a mitigation strategy to reduce the impact in case the risk comes to fruition.
#### Activities 

- Define the governance structure for year 2 onwards
  - how is formed, how is renovated, how are decisions taken
- Continue and augment OSS metrics at UCL
  - Add more OSS projects we've find developed within UCL
  - Measure citations to OSS from publications
  - Start measuring UCL contributions to external maintained projects
  - Generate reports every 6 months of impact (what we create, what we contribute to, what we use)
	- Separate between research, infrastructure,
    - Report on risks of dependencies/sustainability
  - Measure Open Source dependencies of closed source software

>     - this will require access to organisations and reposiotories we may not have at the moment and stakeholders will need to promote the need.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - this will require access to organisations and repositories we may not have at the moment and stakeholders will need to promote the need.
```

    - This is also an important security exercise (ISG must be involved)
- UCL-wide survey to understand the OS landscape and the needs of the community
  - Design based on surveys run by other universities
  - Users ([University of Wisconsin Madison results][uw-survey]), contributors ([University of California results][uc-survey])
- Publish a guidance on how to release open source outcomes within UCL

>   - Including license, development models, community engagement, and commercial opportunities

Reviewer 4: I think `commercial opportunities` or `Commercial Open Source Software (COSS)` is a topic for itself. We have seen the need on selection of licensing for software, for instance dual-licencing is something I have been advocating to maintain community using open-source and academic licences and close source licences to  protected ideas that could provide economical value.
In this [blog](https://blog.serenacapital.com/the-open-source-payoff-5e835c54c0f1), Matthieu Lavergne is talking about Commercial Open Source Software (COSS) and addressed this questions `How challenging is the financing journey for COSS startups?` `Do COSS companies deliver superior exits?`

> Figure out the tasks you’ll have to take to get the project done. Estimate how long it will take to complete each one.

*risk assessment*
> identify and analyse the risks associated with your project activities. From there, you can assess the likelihood and impact of each and rank them based on this information. The risk assessment makes it easier to focus on the most pressing risks and includes a mitigation strategy to reduce the impact in case the risk comes to fruition.

> #### Activities 

Reviewer 2: We'll need a more detailed breakdown eventually: what will the business case fund in year 1, 2, etc? How will this become financially sustainable for UCL?

	- Separate between research, infrastructure,
    - Report on risks of dependencies/sustainability
  - Measure Open Source dependencies of closed source software
    - this will require access to organisations and repositories we may not have at the moment and stakeholders will need to promote the need.
    - This is also an important security exercise (ISG must be involved)
- UCL-wide survey to understand the OS landscape and the needs of the community
  - Design based on surveys run by other universities
  - Users ([University of Wisconsin Madison results][uw-survey]), contributors ([University of California results][uc-survey])
- Publish a guidance on how to release open source outcomes within UCL
  - Including license, development models, community engagement, and commercial opportunities
  - Outcomes such as: software, hardware, data, educational resources, 
  - Ideally work with Library, Arena/DigiEd, UCLB and UCLC. Probably Institute of Making too.
- Education. Make a call with all educators across UCL that uses OS in their modules/classes
  - Find out what support they need
  - Catalogue and highlight on the website those courses
- Education - collaboration

>   - Promote collaborations on students project with open source communities (e.g., master projects) (AIDE and SoftEng master programmes may be ready from 2026-2027)

Reviewer 2: CCMI CDT is doing this
